# rogrammatically-interfacing-geth-nodes
As a developer, sooner rather than later you'll want to start interacting with geth and the Ethereum network via your own programs and not manually through the console. To aid this, geth has built-in support for a JSON-RPC based APIs (standard APIs and geth specific APIs). These can be exposed via HTTP, WebSockets and IPC (UNIX sockets on UNIX based platforms, and named pipes on Windows).  The IPC interface is enabled by default and exposes all the APIs supported by geth, whereas the HTTP and WS interfaces need to manually be enabled and only expose a subset of APIs due to security reasons. These can be turned on/off and configured as you'd expect.  HTTP based JSON-RPC API options:  --http Enable the HTTP-RPC server --http.addr HTTP-RPC server listening interface (default: localhost) --http.port HTTP-RPC server listening port (default: 8545) --http.api API's offered over the HTTP-RPC interface (default: eth,net,web3) --http.corsdomain Comma separated list of domains from which to accept cross origin requests (browser enforced) --ws Enable the WS-RPC server --ws.addr WS-RPC server listening interface (default: localhost) --ws.port WS-RPC server listening port (default: 8546) --ws.api API's offered over the WS-RPC interface (default: eth,net,web3) --ws.origins Origins from which to accept websockets requests --ipcdisable Disable the IPC-RPC server --ipcapi API's offered over the IPC-RPC interface (default: admin,debug,eth,miner,net,personal,shh,txpool,web3) --ipcpath Filename for IPC socket/pipe within the datadir (explicit paths escape it) You'll need to use your own programming environments' capabilities (libraries, tools, etc) to connect via HTTP, WS or IPC to a geth node configured with the above flags and you'll need to speak JSON-RPC on all transports. You can reuse the same connection for multiple requests!  Note: Please understand the security implications of opening up an HTTP/WS based transport before doing so! Hackers on the internet are actively trying to subvert Ethereum nodes with exposed APIs! Further, all browser tabs can access locally running web servers, so malicious web pages could try to subvert locally available APIs!  Operating a private network Maintaining your own private network is more involved as a lot of configurations taken for granted in the official networks need to be manually set up.  Defining the private genesis state First, you'll need to create the genesis state of your networks, which all nodes need to be aware of and agree upon. This consists of a small JSON file (e.g. call it genesis.json):  {
